hello as he said I'm Mike goby I'm one
of the trainer's here at Apple and
although I usually train in front of
crowds of people this is a first for me
for a crowd this large so if I seem a
little bit nervous well I'm not I'm just
bluffing really well how many people
here have ever used a of' web objects or
any of these technologies before almost
everybody how many people here never
have okay hopefully the people who never
have we'll give you a quick sketch to go
into this but my basic assumption in
this exercise is that you either have a
basic idea of what's happening or if you
don't you come and watch the previous
demonstration so you'll have at least a
few minutes old knowledge of what's
happening I'll be talking about
persistent object modeling with EO
modeler which is a technology we use to
connect from a database through the web
application and out to the browser on
the user interface so web objects is the
new technology from Apple that lets you
build dynamic websites and most of these
websites are backed up by relational
databases typically you'll have an
e-commerce application that lets
customers make purchases you need to
know what products can be sold and
that's all stored in a relational
database and EOF allows the persistent
access to that data within your
object-oriented application in this
presentation I'll talk about the basics
of what is a OS it's Enterprise objects
framework on what is woof the web
objects framework and how these two
technologies can work together to build
your application I'll talk a bit about
ile modeler the tools that you actually
use to configure your application and
tell it how to connect to the database I
won't be talking in this too much detail
about how databases work so I'll give a
quick sketch of the basic technology of
what a table is what a row is but it
won't go to very much detail beyond that
so what are the basic concepts we need
to know well first we need to know the
structure of a web application and the
architecture of web objects and
enterprise objects and how they fit
together to make your
location and finally I'll talk about
some entity relational modeling concepts
start off to the web application
typically this is a three-tier model
from the first side we have a browser in
the middle we've got your web
application and finally backing it all
up we have a relational database when
some users somewhere on the internet
type the URL into the browser an HTTP
request gets sent to your application
your application will this end a sequel
request off to the database to request
the objects it needs to serve as the
HTTP request the sequel database gives
rows of data back to your application as
simply raw data but because this is an
object-oriented application those rows
of data will get turned into objects
that your application can use your
application then takes those dynamically
fetched objects and turns them into HTML
to get sent back out to the browser and
all this is something that we call the
request response loop now web objects
does more than just this it also keeps
track of the unique editing context for
every user so we already have one user
who has fetched information from the
database perhaps they've fats the record
and are about to make a purchase
so we've fetched the number of available
records from the database but while
they're making the decision some other
user comes along and that other user
will send a request to the application
which will result in a sequel fetch and
some data coming back to the web objects
application and even if the same rows
are retrieved that have already been
shown to the other user EOF will create
a completely different pool of objects
that are stored in a separate editing
context and that way the two users don't
interact with each other
till one of them actually tries to make
a purchase or does something that will
commit their changes to the database and
finally those objects will turn into
HTML they get sent out to the second
user so the web objects framework
represents the top half of this
object-oriented application the web
objects framework knows how to take
these enterprise objects and turn them
into HTML to be displayed on the web the
enterprise objects framework that's the
part I'll be talking about in this
presentation knows how to talk to a
database fetch in rows of data and then
create objects that web objects can then
use to produce HTML so we have a layered
architecture at the very bottom you'll
have third party database libraries the
Oracle database libraries standard ODBC
libraries whatever third-party libraries
you need on top of those we have the
adapter layer which knows how to connect
to the database and just set raw data
the database layer which knows all about
the classes in your application and
knows how to turn that raw data into an
object for you to use the control layer
which keeps track of what you've done to
those objects so if you make changes you
can eventually save those changes back
into the database or maybe undo or redo
the changes and then finally we have the
web objects framework on the very top
and the web objects framework knows how
to take those objects and present them
to the user in HTML and the database and
adapter layer are what we'll be editing
using yo modeler all of the changes that
we make to describe how the database and
the application will interact live
inside something we call the model file
and the model file just describes a
straightforward one-to-one relationship
this class goes to this table this
column goes to this instance variable
although it can be more complicated if
you have a class that spans several
databases and to edit the ill model file
we'll use a tool cleverly enough named
yo modeler and yo modeler knows how to
configure the adapter to say which
database you're connecting to it knows
how to work with the schema edit the
entities the attributes from the
relationships and it can identify the
various stored procedures and let you
create fetch specifications to be used
later when you actually run the
application so the first step in ill
modeler will be to configure the
database adapter you'll choose configure
adapter from the menu bar and then from
the list of available adapters you'll
choose which database you want to pick
in this case we've chosen the Oracle
database and once you go on from there
you'll get a custom Oracle login panel -
lets you configure which Oracle database
to connect to what's the username you
want to use is what the password is and
when you say ok all of that gets put
into the model file for later use by
your application once you've connected
to the database we have to work with the
entities that is the tables in the
database in the database the entity is
simply a table and in the application
it's a class not a particular object but
entire class of objects in your
object-oriented application in this case
the studio table and the studio class to
create an entity using yo modeler you'll
choose new entity and using the
inspector panel you'll specify what the
direct what the name of the table is the
name of the entity is in this case the
director entity the name of the table
and the name of the class in your
application and if you want to keep your
life simple you'll probably want to
choose similar names like director and
director although EO modeler doesn't
actually care and in fact if you don't
care about the class at all we have a
special class you can use called the EO
generic record which is essentially a
glorified dictionary all it does is
fetch data from the database and stores
it as key value pairs in a dictionary so
you can display the data but you can't
put in any custom business logic
if you wanted custom business logic
would choose a class name such as
director class or even just director ill
Mahler also lets us set up the
attributes in the database an attribute
is the name of a column in this case the
name column of the studio table in our
object-oriented application it's an
instance variable in the various objects
so we have the studio has the Warner
Brothers and twentieth century-fox and
here we have two instance variables
containing Warner Brothers and twentieth
century-fox
now most attributes are what we call
simple attributes just simple strings
integers floating point numbers a neo F
automatically knows how to take that
data from the database and convert it
into the appropriate Java data types we
also have more complicated data to get
stored in the database as a blob and a
blob is just a large chunk of data
usually containing an image or a sound
quicktime movie and they do get read out
of the database into a special class
called the NS data class and in your
model file you specify which particular
class like NS image or NS sound you want
that data to turn into and which factory
method will actually convert the data
object into the particular class that
you need and finally the third type of
attribute will have our key attributes
primary keys in database terminology are
the column that uniquely identifies a
row and a foreign key is a column that
uniquely identifies the row in some
other table now in your object-oriented
application we don't actually have
primary and foreign keys at all because
we don't need them objects are
intrinsically unique this computer
monitor and this computer monitor are
different because there are different
places in the same way in your
application two objects are in different
locations in memory so we don't need a
primary key to tell them apart
they're already unique so if we want to
edit the attributes in EO modeler first
we'll select the particular entity that
we want to work with like the director
and once the director has been selected
on the top we'll see a list of all of
the attributes of that director the
wrote lined in blue on the screen and if
we bring up our inspector panel we'll
see that this particular attribute is
called the talent ID its database column
it's talent ID it's a long type in the
database and in our application it's
stored as an integer
relationships are a bit more complicated
in the database a relationship is a
joint operation between the primary key
of one call one table in this case the
studio ID of the studio table and a
foreign key of a different table the
studio D ID in the movie table now in
the application when you actually
instantiate your objects the
relationship is represented as an
instance variable that points off at
other objects so here we have the movies
variable which points to an array of
movie objects now there's two kinds of
relationships in the database that look
very similar a to one relationship or it
too many but in the application they
look quite different in the application
a relationship to one is simply a
pointer a variable that points directly
to another business object the movie
points to its studio a to many
relationship on the other hand points to
an array of other objects so here we
have the movie variable which refers to
the array of alien and Star Wars we also
have the choice between a one-way or a
two-way relationship in the case of a
two-way relationship the studio knows
all about its movies and the movies all
know about the studio that the rim
but this does occupy more memory in your
application and it also introduces the
possibility of inconsistency where the
movie may contain a studio but that
studio doesn't have a back pointer to
the movie so what you might choose to do
to simplify your object model is take
out the back pointers and only have a
one-way relationship so now our studio
knows about the movies but a given movie
doesn't actually know what studio it
came from an do model or the way you
would do this is by only setting up one
half of the relationship you can fear
the two of them independently so to use
eel modeler to edit our relationship
once you've selected the entity we'll go
down to the bottom half of the screen
and we'll see a list of all of the
relationships
if we select your relationship in this
case the movie and bring up our
inspector panel we see that we can give
it the name movie the entity is a movie
so it's a relationship from the director
table to the movie table and we're using
the movie ID of the director and the
movie ID of the movie table to actually
resolve this relationship when we
perform the fetch many-to-many
relationships in the database require a
third table this is a situation where a
movie could have multiple talents who
starred in the movie but at the same
time a given talent I give an actor
could have acted in several different
movies in the database we need a third
table that's called the join table and
it simply has the primary keys of the
appropriate movie and talent to form the
relationship in the application we don't
need that third class because we simply
have the movie maintains an array of
talent every piece of talent will
maintain an array of movies and when you
update the relationships Co modeler a
neo F will automatically insert the
appropriate rows into the acted in table
to form that relationship happens
quickly to set up this relationship and
yo modeler you could create that entity
create the relationships and put it all
together by hand but that's fairly
tedious so instead the engineers of
Apple gave us a nice graphical user
interface way to do it
we'll simply select the two entities in
this case the movie and the talent and
from the property menu we'll choose join
in many-to-many
when we do that a third entity gets
created the movie talent entity and all
of the appropriate relationships are set
up so that now we have the many-to-many
relationship if we were to select one of
the entities in this case the movie and
choose the talents relationship and
bring up the inspector panel we don't
get the usual relationship inspector
this inspector panel just tells us that
this relationship talent is actually a
combination of the movie talent
relationship in movie and in the talent
relationship in movie talent and we'll
just use a dot notation to join them
together we can also use ill modeler to
set up relationships between more than
one database
this is especially useful and we have to
connect to legacy systems where we
didn't get to design the databases and
we have one system from one company that
was used one database environment and
then perhaps a newer company that is
just been acquired uses a totally
different database system and your
application needs to talk to both well a
neo modeler the way we'll set this up is
first we'll open up the model file for
one of the databases in this case the
video rentals and now we have another
database of all of the movies ever made
the movie stars database within the
video rentals will simply select the
entity that we want to create a
relationship in
and bring up the relationship inspector
now there's a pop-up labeled model in
this case it's set to video rentals a
relationship back into the same database
but all we have to do is select the
pop-up list and change that to the other
database the movie stars database and
from there on we'll just wire things up
in the usual way specify which entity in
the movie stars database we want to use
whether it's a to one or a to many
relationship and specify the attributes
that were used we'll do to create the
join an hour runtime when you actually
try to fetch a video-rental EOF will
automatically perform a fetch across the
databases perform the appropriate cross
database join and retrieve all the
information that you need if you update
the relationships and then save your
changes
yo elf will automatically save the
appropriate changes to each database to
keep your relationships intact so that
was part one the basics of how does a
of' work what is yo modeler and what is
the database anyway well the next thing
to do is how to work specifically with
the entities we have a particular studio
or talent or director table in the
database well what do we want to do with
it we'll probably want to generate some
sequel code if we haven't already
inherited a database from our legacy you
might want to browse the data see what's
already there if there already is a
database that exists who might want to
just pull all that information into you
modeler and Ivo modeler builder entities
for us and finally to actually start
writing our application we'll probably
want to generate some Java classes to
generate the sequel you simply select
the particular entity in this case the
talent and bring up the sequel
generation panel and here we'll say that
we want to drop the old table
drop the old support for primary keys
create a new table create the new
primary key support and we can see all
of the sequel code that will get
executed and we can either execute it
immediately or save it off into a
temporary file so we can give it to a
database administrator to execute on a
remote server if the database already
exists you might want to browse the data
so in this case we could select the
talent table talent entity bring up the
data browser and see a list of all of
the talent in the database we can also
type in a particular qualifier last name
begins with F and just see the talent
whose last name begins with F and if we
already have a database which nine times
out of ten is the situation because we
already have existing applications we're
now trying to move into the internet we
can just use the reverse engineering
tools to specify which database we're
using in this case open based Lite bring
up the login panel to specify how to
connect to that particular database and
where it's located and then choose
information help us guide us through the
creation process yes we want to give
primary keys to the entities yes we want
to use custom enterprise objects so if
there's a talent table we want yo
modeler to automatically generate the
talent class for us to use and then
finally select all of the table from all
the tables in the database
which particular tables we want to use
in the model file
and the last thing we'll want to do once
we've already imported our model and
started to work with it for a while and
in the meantime our database
administrator over in that corner of the
world is busy working with our database
schema we need to bring these two worlds
into sync again and we can use that by
we can do that by bringing up the
synchronized schema window and that
window will list all of the new tables
in the database or new entities in your
model file any new attributes that were
added or any attributes these properties
were changed and when you click the
synchronize button Ile modeler will
automatically go and make the
appropriate changes to your model file
into the database once it's synchronized
and our application is now in sync with
the database we can generate some Java
classes so we can start coding our
application so again you'll just select
these entity the talent say please
generate some Java classes specify where
to save them and if you do try to save
them into a project then the panel or
panel will appear asking you whether you
want to add the files to the project as
well as just putting them physically
into the project directory and at that
point those Java classes are now
standard Java source code you can fire
up project builder make any edits you
need to make and then build and run your
web objects application
and the last tool that you'll modeler
provides is a convenient diagram view to
give you a graphical mute view of your
schema and you can just inspect this
view to see what your various entities
are and how they're related or if you
want you can actually do simple edit
operations creating relationships
breaking relationships or renaming
various attributes directly in the
diagram view so now we know some basic
database concepts we know how to use yo
modeler to do a little bit of custom
configuration how do we generate the de
sequel how do we generate the Java
classes well the next step now that we
have our application up and running is
actually going to be to have runtime
behavior how do we validate the data
keep bad information from hitting the
database how do we detect a conflict
when two different users are both trying
to edit the same record at the same time
shared entities we can use for memory
improvements and then we can use stored
procedures ah excuse me and fetch
specifications to also give our
application better performance so
there's different ways to validate the
simplest validation is done right within
yo modeler bring up the inspector panel
for an attribute click on the second
icon in the icon path and you can see
the advanced inspector and in this
inspector we can say this entity will
not permit null values in the attribute
for example a customer can't have no for
a last name you can limit the string
lanes we won't sell to anybody whose
name contains more than 15 characters
because we have an old database that
just can't cope with it
maybe we can make a relationships
mandatory perhaps every customer has to
have a sales representative or perhaps
every movie has to have a director
and we can also specify what happens
when we do a deletion if I delete a
studio should I also delete all the
movies that studio created should I set
them up as movies with no studio or
should I in fact refuse to allow the
studio to get deleted until I've first
gone through manually and reassigned
movies and this validation is fairly
useful but often doesn't meet all of our
needs maybe it's okay to have last names
that are not null or no but what if we
want to put any rules that say the last
name can't contain any spaces that's
more complicated than yo modeler can
represent so to do that sort of
validation in your java class you'll
create a special validation method in
this case validate for save throws an EO
validation exception and before we try
to save the changes to the database
we'll check and if the person is too
young but claims to have a driver's
license we'll throw the exception saying
we're not going to let that data into
the database you can also write custom
validation methods for every attribute
so we could just say validate last name
and that method will automatically get
cold if the user tries to change
somebody's last name in addition to
validation on a single user basis making
sure that a particular user doesn't try
to let a young person drive a car we can
also get a problem of conflict detection
where perhaps over here in one
application I've decided that this
customer is in fact only 13 years old
because I just called her up talked to
her parents and found out that no she's
not 26 after all meanwhile offi in
another corner of the world some other
user has called up the same customer
record and has just tried to give the
user a driver's license now each of
those operations independently is
correct
but put together they'll form a conflict
eel modeler an EOS supports two ways of
dealing with those conflicts if we use
pessimistic locking we're going to
assume that there are problems and the
way we make ourselves safe with that
assumption is when AOL fetches the
records out of the database it actually
locks those rows and no other user can
fetch those rows from the database until
we either commit or revert our changes
that's very safe but unfortunately in
the world of web browsers when people
call up the screen then follow a
hyperlink then fold another hyperlink
then they go for lunch then the day is
over and they go home and I never did
save or commit pessimistic walking
doesn't work very well because now all
of a sudden nobody can use your database
so EOF also supports something called
optimistic locking and with optimistic
locking we will allow two users to fetch
the same record but before any user
saves their changes back into the
database eaf will automatically compare
the record in memory against the record
in the database and make sure they match
and if they don't match that means
someone else has made a change a neo
else will throw an exception and say
that we can't save those changes and
within yo modeler you can use a little
padlock icon it's not a suitcase and
specify which particular attributes you
care about in this case we don't want
anybody changing the first and last name
without both of them being changed or
without one person having access to both
of them but we don't really care about
the paygrade if i want to change some of
these first and last name while somebody
else changes their pay grade we don't
care so we have these exceptions being
thrown by EOF and now we have to know
how to deal with them in your class well
we use the standard Java exception
handling mechanism
inside our Save Changes method will ask
the session for the default editing
context and remember the default editing
context is the little pool of objects
that this particular user is using and
it's kept separate from every other user
we'll try to save our changes and if
there were any validation exceptions
then we'll generate an error page
displaying the appropriate error message
if everything went through okay
we'll return null save our changes and
redisplay the current page uf also
supports the concept of shared objects
because as I said normally every user
gets their own editing context and
that's good for security the two users
can't interfere with each other but it's
very bad for memory as soon as we have
five users hitting their database every
user looking at all of the products in
our catalog suddenly we've got more
memory that our computer can handle so
we have the concept of shared objects
this is a new feature in web objects if
you have a read-only entity like the
product in a catalog you can mark it as
a shared entity and when your web
application launches up EOF will
automatically fetch all instances of
that entity into memory and then all of
the different users will all share
access to those particular objects and
if by chance some user should try to
change one of those objects even though
it's shared that's ok EOF is clever
enough to notice that and it throws one
of those validation exceptions we talked
about tell these though this is a
read-only entity you're not allowed to
edit it
you'll modeler also lets us create
stored procedures if there's a
particular fetch operation we'll be
doing over and over and over again we
can build it graphically in your modeler
so that was the type specification that
was for
ages stored procedures what we use to
improve our performance so we can create
stored procedures within EO modeler and
then they can get triggered
automatically do inserts updates and
deletes and to any database triggers
that we want executed we can also have
fetch specifications that we use to
retrieve data from the database build a
once an EO modeler and then at runtime
we can just reuse that fetch
specification time and time again in EO
modeler you'll select an entity in this
case the talent entity create a new set
specification and then graphically
assemble the query that you want so here
we want a list of all of the actors
based on the movie revenues so we can
actually build up a key path where are
the actors where the roles movies
revenue is greater than the revenue and
all that actors roles movies date
released are after a certain date and
their movies date released is before
another date and when you actually
execute this fetch EOF will
automatically perform the joint
operations to resolve that query because
we actually have three different tables
involved here there's the talent table
for the actor the movie table for the
movie and that rules table that was a
join table I told you about that
actually relates Abe actor and the
movies that they've been in an EO F will
automatically put all that together at
one time you don't worry about it you
just call the fetch actor by movie
revenue and your source code the way
this will look is again you'll create or
get hold of your editing context declare
an array variable to store the results
of your fetch and then use the yo
utilities class this is a class that has
a bunch of static methods for common
operations so here will ask you
utilities
give me all of the objects with the fet
specification and binding and pass in
the name of the fad specification actor
buy movie revenue and then a dictionary
of key value bindings in this case the
revenue and the before date now in this
example we actually had an after date in
our fete specification the dollar signs
represent the variables that will be
looked up in the dictionary so we have
revenue after date and before date in
our dictionary we don't provide the
after date so EOF will automatically
prune that particular clause out of the
fete specification if you didn't provide
a value we'll assume that you don't care
and that's the essence of how AOF and
Ile modeler work together to build your
application first you use your modeler
to inspect the database pull in all the
data that you need to look at set up the
entities describe how a particular
database table corresponds to a class in
your application use the o models do any
custom entity work you need to do
generate some sequel code maybe set up
some simple validation rules in yo
modeler or perhaps write some more
complicated validation rules within AOF
and in your java code and then finally
you actually build and run the
application that will be displaying your
information and in fact I'll do that for
you right now
so we could switch over to one or number
four and create a show of hands here in
the audience how many people here did
not see the previous presentation where
you saw how ill modeler and project
builder how you saw web objects folder
and project builder work together how
many people here did not see that
so most people did good I'll quickly
sketch out the details of that but I'll
focus most of my attention here on yo
modeler
so bring up the EO modeler application
and I'll create a new model
I'll choose which type of database I
want to connect to in this case I'll use
open base light open base light is
actually a filesystem database so we'll
navigate off to in the file system where
the database is stored and that is in
local library databases the movies
database and I'll say that's the
database I want to use I then get to
make some selections here I do want to
assign primary keys to the entities I
don't want to be asked about all the
relationships I'll just trust UF to do
the right thing I don't want to be asked
about store procedures again I'll just
trust ill modeler and EOF to make the
right choices and I do want to use
custom enterprise objects so I do want a
director class a talent class and a
movie class in my application on the
next screen we have a list of all the
tables in that database and I choose
which particular tables I want to use in
this model well in this particular table
I want the movie and I want the movie
role and the studio and the talent
although EOF is going to do its best to
ask all the right questions sometimes it
does need to come to me for help in the
case of our movie role there isn't a
single column that's the primary key
because that was a joint table between
the movie and the talent entities so
eeeh modeler comes back and tells me I
don't know which of these is meant to be
the primary key I'll tell it it's
actually both the movie ID and the
talent ID and I'll finish so now we have
our L model file because this is a live
demo and I am paranoid I'll save my
changes right now and I'll call this 403
slash movies it will come up and tell me
that the 403 directory doesn't exist
I'll say yes please create that
directory for me and here we are an EO
modeler we can select a particular
entity the movie and see a list of all
of its attributes so the movie has a
category the data was released the movie
ID which will see is the primary key of
this particular entity and it doesn't
have the diamond icon and that diamond
icon tells us whether or not there's
going to be an instance variable in our
application that goes along with that
column and for the movie ID the answer
is no we don't want the primary key to
be visible inside the application down
below we have a relationship the two
movie role and the to studio
relationship and I don't like those
names so I will change them to the roles
of the movie and the studio of the movie
and we can also look at the inspector
panel so if I select a particular
attribute the category I bring up the
inspector panel we can see the name of
it is category
Rory the column name in the database is
all caps category external type is
character and internally it's a string
but we're going to limit the width to 20
characters because that's how many
characters we can put into the database
similarly I could select a relationship
and the relationship name here is roles
it's a relationship to the movie role
entity and it's a one-to-many
relationship so a particular movie has a
relationship to many roles and we're
doing the join using the movie ID and
the movie ID columns of the two tables
evil modeler will also let me see the
diagram view that I showed you a book
told you about before so here we can
actually view our entire schema as a
picture and if we arrange it nicely we
can see the relationships between our
various objects so now we see that we
have the movie and the talent are
connected through this movie role and
that the movie also has a relationship
to the single studio
well we also have more than one
relationship between movies and talent a
movie star is a number of actors but
it's also directed by a particular
director and some movies have more than
one director so if I select the list
view and select the talent and the movie
it's the talent and just the movie I can
then choose join in many too many and we
get another entity here called the movie
talent which I happen to know because
I've seen this database before it's
actually called the director and the
table is director
and let's cancel that
and now once we've done all of this
we're ready to actually build an
application so while high deal modeler
actually before I high deal modeler I'm
going to have a look at this director
table and make sure it does what I think
it's going to do the movie ID the talent
ID the movie ID the talent ID yep that
looks good and we can do a fetch and it
says that there is no talent ID on
director so rather than actually try to
resolve what's going on I'll just take
that out because we don't need it for
this demo so that was the basics of how
to use ill model or to explore a
database pull in all the information
that we needed and then construct a
model file to describe the mapping
between the database and our application
I can put you a modeler away and bring
up project builder and now in project
builder I'll build a simple application
that uses this data to actually display
some information on the screen we'll
call this the actor app and it's going
to be a web objects application we'll
say that we want some help building this
application and we're going to be using
Java and we'll open the model file that
we just built so we'll grab the movies
model file and because this application
is called actors we want to display the
talent in the database I will show a
table of all of the particular actors
that match our query we choose which
attributes we want to display so this
basic web application will go back to
our previous screen is going to display
a query
form and then a table of results that
match the query so what do we want to
actually show in the table well let's
show the first name and the last name
and which attributes do we want the user
to be able to execute a query on the
last name the first name what do we want
now let's say we want to query on the
put that back because we want the first
name to appear first and then the last
name and now the assistant is going to
go away and actually build a project
force that once we build and execute it
will give us the user interface we've
asked for so I'll bring up the build
panel and I'll build this application
once the application is finished
building put that away and we'll bring
up our launch panel and we'll actually
run our web objects application now
after launching the server-side of the
web objects application web objects is
automatically going to launch a browser
to display this information and it does
this for your convenience as a developer
when you're final steps before you ship
an application and deploy it it's to go
into preferences and turn off that
preference so that you don't have a
browser firing off on your server off in
your server room
and here at Omni Webb we can see our
application where we can search for the
talents specify what talents we want to
display let's say we want everybody
whose last name begins with F and we've
got a list of all the talent in our
database or actually all the talent is
last name begins with F so that was the
simplest case of bringing up ill modeler
pointing at an existing database and
saying please build me a database we'll
work with this and then using the
assistant in web objects builder and
project builder to actually build an
application that will display that
information well the more complicated
case might be if we wanted to use one of
those best specifications that I told
you about so we'll go back to project
builder and in our resources will find
the movies model file and here in our
movies model file will select the talent
entity and I'll say that I want to
create a fetch specification that goes
along with the talent and the fetch
specification let's give it a name we'll
call it fetch actors
and we want to fetch where the first
name is like dollar sign first name and
that dollar sign first name means there
will be a key in the dictionary whose
value is the first name we care about
and whose last name is like last name
and whose movie role movie has the title
which matches the title so we'll save
this modal file now that we've added the
new fetch specification and now rather
than just doing query by example we can
actually use this particular fetch
specification in our application so
we'll hi do modeler we'll go ahead at
this component that project builder and
web objects builder built for us
automatically and this component has the
query by example segment in which we
specify the talents to display we set
their first and last name and we have
the match button and then we have the
table segment where we actually
construct the table using repeating rows
and columns to display the information
well up here what I'd like to do is
create another query field so we'll say
we also want to search by movie title
and in fact I want to make all the fonts
a bit larger
there we go
and I'll use the web objects builder
inspector panel to say the value of this
particular field is going to be the
talent display group query match title
and because the DES query is simply a
dictionary I can associate arbitrary key
value pairs in with it so now we have
our application which will display all
the talent that we need to display save
these changes I'll add a special action
because we can't use our default fetch
and it's action will be called search
and we'll have a look at our source code
and our search action will say
we'll get the default editing context
this is the collection of objects that
were displaying to this particular user
and the dictionary that we want to use
is our the query match from the display
group and the results will be will use
au utilities to get the objects with
objects the FET specification and
bindings passing the editing context the
name of the entity the name of the fetch
specification which I'm suspicious so
I'll go back and double check yep and is
called fetch actors and our dictionary
of bindings and then say
talent display group set object array
results and the display group I won't to
go into within a lot of detail but
essentially the display group is an
object that knows how to display objects
in particular a group of objects in the
case aquaria by example it built the
query on the fly in the case of our
query we did the query by hand so once
we get the results we just hand the
results to the display group and say
these are the objects that you'll be
managing thank you that's actually great
correct Java code here we'll build the
application
we'll launch the application and now we
could again ask for all the actors whose
names begin with F by typing an F
asterisk or if we just want to just know
all the actors in a particular movie we
could say we want to know all the actors
in the movie star wars and it tells us
that there is no title available and
since I have only one minute left I'm
going to say I'm not going to bother
trying to debug this and instead I'm
going to fight Steve up on the stage and
we'll have the question announces
you